# Hello Window

## First Window

- First include GLAD before you include other header files that require OpenGL for example GLFW.
- This way, GLFW will detect that OpenGL has already been loaded and it will load appropriately.

```c++
#include <iostream>
#include <glad/glad.h>
#include <GLFW/glfw3.h>
```

- In the main function, first initialize GLFW with `glfwInit` after which we can configure GLFW with `glfwWindowHint` and tell it we want OpenGL 3.3 and that we want to use the core profile.
- On MacOSX, you need to add `glfwWindowHint(GLFW_OPENGL_FORWARD_COMPAT, GL_TRUE)` to your initialization code for it to work.

```c++
int main()
{
    glfwInit();
    glfwWindowHint(GLFW_CONTEXT_VERSION_MAJOR, 3);
    glfwWindowHint(GLFW_CONTEXT_VERSION_MINOR, 3);
    glfwWindowHint(GLFW_OPENGL_PROFILE, GLFW_OPENGL_CORE_PROFILE);
    // glfwWindowHint(GLFW_OPENGL_FORWARD_COMPAT, GL_TRUE);

    return 0;
}
```

- Next we create a window object and check if it was successfully created.
- After that, we tell GLFW to make the context of our window the main context in our current thread.

```c++
GLFWwindow* window = glfwCreateWindow(800, 600, // Width x Height
                                    "Hello Window", // Title
                                    NULL, NULL // Ignore these
                                    );

if(window == NULL)
{
    std::cout << "Failed to create GLFW window" << std::endl;
    glfwTerminate();
    return -1;
}

glfwMakeContextCurrent(window);
```

- GlAD manages function pointers for OpenGL so initialize it first before calling any OpenGL function.
- We pass GLAD the function to load the address of the OpenGL function pointers (These are OS Specific).
- GLFW gives us `glfwGetProcAddress` that defines the correct function based on which OS we are compiling for.

```c++
if(!gladLoadGLLoader((GLADloadproc)glfwGetProcAddress))
{
    std::cout << "Failed to initialize GLAD" << std::endl;
    return -1;
}
```

- Now tell OpenGL the size of the render window.

```c++
glViewport(0, 0 // Location of the lower left corner of the window
        800, 600 // Width x Height (In pixels)
        );
```

- If we want, we can set the size of the viewport to be smaller than the window's size.  
- Now, register a callback functionon the window that gets called each time the window is resized.
- The resize callback function should look like this:

```c++
void framebuffer_size_callback(GLFWwindow* window, int width, int height);
```

- The width and height arguments are the new window dimensions.
- When the window changes size, GLFW calls this function and fills in the proper arguments for you to process.

```c++
void framebuffer_size_callback(GLFWwindow* window, int width, int height)
{
    glViewport(0, 0, width, height);
}
```

- Register it:

```c++
glfwSetFramebufferSizeCallback(window, framebuffer_size_callback);
```

- In the render loop:

```c++
while(!glfwWindowShouldClose(window))
{
    glfwSwapBuffers(window);
    glfwPollEvents();
    // ...
}
```

- The function `glfwWindowShouldClose` checks if GLFW has been instructed to close and returns `true` or `false` accordingly.
- The function `glfwPollEvents` checks if any events have been triggered, updates the window state, and calls the corresponding functions(callbacks).
- The function `glfwSwapBuffers` will swap the color buffer that has been used to draw in during this iteration and show it as output to the screen.
- At the end of the main function, that is as soon as we exit the render loop, clean or delete all allocated resources.

```c++
glfwTerminate();
return 0;
```

## Input and Rendering

- To receive input, we will be using the `glfwGetKey` function that takes the window together with a key as arguments and returns whether the key is currently being pressed.
- We are putting all this in the function `processInput` to make the code more organized.

```c++
void processInput(GLFWwindow* window)
{
    if(glfwGetKey(window, GLFW_KEY_ESCAPE) == GLFW_PRESS)
    {
        glfwSetWindowShouldClose(window, true);
    }
}
```

- If the user hits the escape key (if not, the function `glfwGetKey` returns `GLFW_RELEASE`), we close GLFW by setting its `WindowShouldClose` property to true.
- We then call `processInput` in every iteration of the render loop:

```c++
// Render loop.
while(!glfwWindowShouldClose(window))
{
    // Input
    processInput(window);

    // Rendering commands here
    // ...

    // Check and call events and swap the buffer
    glfwSwapBuffers(window);
    glfwPollEvents();
}
```

- To spice things up, let us clear the screen using a color of our choice.
- At the start of each render loop, we will usually want to clear the screen otherwise we would still see the results from the previous iteration.
- The function `glClearColor` sets a color that will be used to clear the screen with while `glClear` clears the specified buffer(s) like `GL_COLOR_BUFFER_BIT`, `GL_STENCIL_BUFFER_BIT` and `GL_STENCIL_BUFFER_BIT` with the color specified by `glClearColor`.

```c++
glClearColor(0.2f, 0.3f, 0.3f, 1.0f);
glClear(GL_COLOR_BUFFER_BIT);
```

- Thus, `glClearColor` is a state-setting function function while `glClear` is a state-using function.