# Hello Triangle
## Graphics pipeline
1. **Vertex Shader**.
2. *Shape Assembly*
3. **Geometry Shader**
4. *Tests and Blending*
5. **Fragment Shader**
6. *Rasterization*

## Normalized Device Coordinates (NDC)
- Once your vertex coordinates have been processed in the vertex shader, they should be in NDC which is a small space where the `x`, `y`, and `z` values vary from `-1.0` to `1.0`. Any coordinates outside this range will be clipped and won't be visible on the screen.
    ```ascii
                    ^
                   y|(0,1)
                    |
                    |
                    |
                    |
              (0, 0)|           (1, 0)
    --------------------------------->
    (-1, 0)         |               x
                    |
                    |
                    |
                    |
                    |(0, -1)
    ```

## Vertex Input
- To render a triangle, specify three vertices:
    ```c++
    float vertices[] = {
        -0.5f, -0.5f, 0.0f,
        0.5f, -0.5f, 0.0f,
        0.0f, 0.5f, 0.0f
    };
    ```
- Send the vertex data as input to the vertex shader. This is done by creating memory on the GPU where we store the vertex data, configure how OpenGL should interpret the memory and specify how to send the data to the graphics card.
- We manage this data via **Vertex Buffer Objects** (**VBO**) that can store a large number of vertices in the GPU's memory.
- Generate a vertex buffer object with a buffer ID using the `glGenBuffers` function:
    ```c++
    unsigned int VBO;
    glGenBuffers(1, &VBO);
    ```
- Bind the buffer to the `GL_ARRAY_BUFFER` object so that any buffer calls we make (on the `GL_ARRAY_BUFFER` target) will be used to configure the VBO.
    ```c++
    glBindBuffer(GL_ARRAY_BUFFER, VBO);
    ```
- Copy the vertex data into the buffer's memory:
    ```c++
    glBufferData(GL_ARRAY_BUFFER, sizeof(vertices), vertices, GL_STATIC_DRAW);
    ```
    - `glBufferData` copies user-defined data into the currently bound buffer. The arguments are:
        1. The type of buffer we want to copy data into.
        2. The size of the data (in bytes) we want to pass to the buffer.
        3. The data we want to send.
        4. How we want the graphics card to manage the given data. It can take three forms:
            - `GL_STREAM_DRAW`: the data is set only once and used by the GPU a few times.
            - `GL_STATIC_DRAW`: the data is set only once and used many times.
            - `GL_DYNAMIC_DRAW`: the data is changed a lot and used many time.

## Vertex Shader
- Modern OpenGL requires us to specify at least a vertex and a fragment shader.
- Below is a basic vertex shader:
    ```glsl
    #version 330 core
    layout (location = 0) in vec3 aPos;

    void main() {
        gl_Position = vec4(aPos.x, aPos.y, aPos.z, 1.0);
    }
    ```
- We begin by specifying the GLSL version.
- Next, we declare all the input vertex attributes in the vertex shader with the `in` keyword.
- We specifically set the location of the input variable using `layout (location = 0)` 
- To set the output of the vertex shader we have to assign the position data to the predefined `gl_Position` which is a **vex4** behind the scenes.

### Compiling a shader
- We store the source code for the vertex shader in a `const` C string for now:
    ```c++
    const char *vertexShaderSource = "#version 330 core\n"
        "layout (location = 0) in vec3 aPos;\n"
        "void main()\n"
        "{\n"
        "    gl_Position = vec4(aPos.x, aPos.y, aPos.z, 1.0);\n"
        "}\0";
    ```
- Create a shader object, again referenced by an ID.
    ```c++
    unsigned int vertexShader;
    vertexShader = glCreateShader(GL_VERTEX_SHADER);
    ```
- Attach the shader source to the shader object and compile the shader.
    ```c++
    glShaderSource(vertexShader, 1, &vertexShaderSource, NULL);
    glCompileShader(vertexShader);
    ```
- `glShaderSource` takes these arguments:
    1. The shader object to compile.
    2. How many strings we are passing as source code.
    3. The actual source code of the vertex shader.
    4. We can leave this as NULL.
- Now let us check if compilation was successful:
    ```c++
    int success;
    char infoLog[512];
    glGetShaderiv(vertexShader, GL_COMPILE_STATUS, &success);
    ```
- First we define an integer to inidicate success and a storage container for the error messages (if any). We then check if compilation was successful with `glGetShaderiv`.
- If compilation failed, retrieve the error message with `glGetShaderInfoLog`:
    ```c++
    if (!success) {
        glGetShaderInfoLog(vertexShader, 512, NULL, infoLog);
        std::cout << "ERROR::SHADER::VERTEX::COMPILATION_FAILED\n" << infoLog << std::endl;
    }
    ```

## Fragment Shader
- Output an orangish color:
    ```glsl
    #version 330 core
    out vec4 FragColor;

    void main() {
        FragColor = vec4(1.0f, 0.5f, 0.2f, 1.0f);
    }
    ```
- The fragment shader only requires one output variable that is of size 4. We declare an output variable with the **out** keyword.
- Compile the shader.
    ```c++
    unsigned int fragmentShader;
    fragmentShader = glCreateShader(GL_FRAGMENT_SHADER);
    glShaderSource(fragmentShader, 1, &fragmentShaderSource, NULL);
    glCompileShader(fragmentShader);
    ```

## Shader Program.
- A shader program is the final linked version of multiple shaders combined.
- Create a shader program:
    ```c++
    unsigned int shaderProgram;
    shaderProgram = glCreateProgram();
    ```
- Attach the compiled shaders to the program object and then link them:
    ```c++
    glAttachShader(shaderProgram, vertexShader);
    glAttachShader(shaderProgram, fragmentShader);
    glLinkProgram(shaderProgram);
    ```
- We can check if linking a shader program failed:
    ```c++
    glGetProgramiv(shaderProgram, GL_LINK_STATUS, &success);
    if (!success) {
        glGetProgramInfoLog(shaderProgram, 512, NULL, infoLog);
    }
    ```
- The result is a program object we can activate using `glUseProgram`.
    ```c++
    glUseProgram(shaderProgram);
    ```
- Every shader and rendering call after `glUseProgram` will now use this program object (and thus the shaders).
- Now delete the shader objects because after linking, we no longer need them.
    ```c++
    glDeleteShader(vertexShader);
    glDeleteShader(fragmentShader);
    ```

## Linking Vertex Attributes
Our vertex buffer data is stored as follows
- The position data is stored as 32-bit (4-byte) floating point values.
- Each position is composed of 3 of those values.
- There is no space (or other values) between each set of 3 values. The values are **tightly packed** in the array.
- The first value in the data is at the beginning of the buffer.
- Wit this knowledge we can tell OpenGL how it should interpret the certex data (per vertex attribute):
    ```c++
    glVertexAttribPointer(0, 3, GL_FLOAT, GL_FALSE, 3 * sizeof(float), (void*)0);
    glEnableVertexAttribArray(0);
    ```
- The first parameter specifies which vertex attribute we want to configure. In the vertex shader, we specified the location of the `position` vertex attribute with `layout (location = 0)`. This sets the lcoaation of the vertex attribute to 0 and since we want to pass data to this vertex attribute, we pass in 0.
- The next argument specifies the size of the vertex attribute. The vertex attribute is a vec3 so it is composed of 3 values.
- The third argument specifies the type of the data.
- The next argument specifies if we want tht data to be normalized.
- The fifth argument is known as the **stride** and tells us the space between consecutive vertex attributes.
- The last parameter is the **offset** of where the position data begins in the buffer.
    
Each vertex attribute takes its data from memory managed by a VBO and which VBO it takes its data from is determined by the VBO currently bound to `GL_ARRAY_BUFFER` when calling `glVertexAttribPointer`.
- Now that we have specified how OpenGL should interpret the vertex data, we should also enable the vertex attribute with `glEnableVertexAttribArray` giving the vertex attribute location as its argument. Vertex attributes are disabled by default. Drawing an object would now look like:
    ```c++
    // 0. Copy our vertices array in a buffer for OpenGL to use
    glBindBuffer(GL_ARRAY_BUFFER, VBO);
    glBufferData(GL_ARRAY_BUFFER, sizeof(vertices), vertices, GL_STATIC_DRAW);
    // 1. Set the vertex attribute pointers
    glVertexAttribPointer(0, 3, GL_FLOAT, GL_FALSE, 3 * sizeof(float), (void*)0);
    glEnableVertexAttribArray(0);
    // 2. Use our shader program when we want to render an object
    glUseProgram(shaderProgram);
    // 3. Now draw the object
    someOpenGLFunctionThatDrawsOurTriangle();
    ```

### Vertex Array Object
- A VAO can be bound just like a VBO and any subsequent vertex attribute calls from that point will be stored inside the VAO. This makes switching between different vertex data and attribute configurations as easy as binding a different VAO.
- **Core OpenGL *requires* that we use a VAO so it knows what to do with our vertex inputs**
- A VAO stores the following:
    - Calls to `glEnableVertexAttribArray`.
    - Vertex attribute configureation via `glVertexAttribPointer`.
    - VBOs associated with vertex attributes by calls to `glVertexAttribPointer`.
- To generate a VAO:
    ```c++
    unsigned int VAO;
    glGenVertexArrays(1, &VAO);
    ```
- To use a VAO bind it using `glBindVertexArray`. Then we should bind/configure the corresponding VBOs and attribute pointers and then unbind the VAO for later use.
    ```c++
    // 1. Bind VAO
    glBindVertexArray(VAO);
    // 2. Copy our vertices array in a buffer for OpenGL to use
    glBindBuffer(GL_ARRAY_BUFFER, VBO);
    glBufferData(GL_ARRAY_BUFFER, sizeof(vertices), vertices, GL_STATIC_DRAW);
    // 3. Set our VAOs
    glVertexAttribPointer(0, 3, GL_FLOAT, GL_FALSE, 3 * sizeof(float), (void*)0);
    glEnableVertexAttribArray(0);
    // [...]
    // In render loop
    // 4. Draw the object
    ```

### The triangle
- To draw our objects, we use the `glDrawArrays` function that draws primitives using the currently active shader, the previously defined VAO configuration and with the VBO's vertex data.
    ```c++
    glUseProgram(shaderProgram);
    glBindVertexArray(VAO);
    glDrawArrays(GL_TRIANGLES, 0, 3);
    ```
- The first parameter is the OpenGL primitive type we would like to draw. The second is the starting index of the vertex array we would like to draw. The last argument specifies how many vertives we want to draw.
