# Transformations
## GLM
- It is simply a suite of three header files
    ```c++ 
    #include <glm/glm.hpp>
    #include <glm/gtc/matrix_transform.hpp>
    #include <glm/gtc/type_ptr.hpp>
    ```
- We can now translate a vector of (1, 0, 0) by (1, 1, 0).
- Note that we define it as a `glm::vec4` with its homogenous coordinate set to 1.0.
    ```c++
    glm::vec4 vec(1.0f, 0.0f, 0.0f, 1.0f);
    // Define the transformation matrix by passing our identity matrix
    glm::mat4 trans;
    // the given matrix is multiplied with a translation matrix and the resulting
    // matrix is returned
    trans = glm::translate(trans, glm::vec3(1.0f, 1.0f, 0.0f));
    // Do the actual translation
    vec = trans * vec;
    std::cout << vec.x << vec.y << vec.z << std::endl;
    // (2, 1, 0)
    ```
- We could also rotate and scale the container from the previous tutorial
    ```c++
    glm::mat4 trans;
    trans = glm::rotate(trans, glm::radians(90.0f), glm::vec3(0.0, 0.0, 1.0));
    trans = glm::scale(trans, glm::vec3(0.5, 0.5, 0.5));
    ```
- We first scale the container by `0.5` on each axis then rotate the container 90 degrees around the Z axis. GLM expects its angles in radians thus we convert degrees to radians.
- Because we pass the matrix to each of GLM's functions, GLM automatically multiplies the matrices together resulting in a transformation matrix that combines all the transformations.
- To get the transformatin to the shaders, we make use of GLSL's built in `mat4` type.
    ```c++
    #version 330 core
    layout (location = 0) in vec3 aPos;
    layout (location = 1) in vec3 aTexCoord;

    out vec2 TexCoord;

    uniform mat4 transform;

    void main() {
        gl_Position = transform * vec4(aPos, 1.0f);
        TexCoord = vec2(aTexCoord.x, 1.0 -aTexCoord.y);
    }
    ```
- GLSL also has `mat2` and `mat3` types that allow for `swizzling` like operations just like ectors.
- To pass the transformation matrix:
    ```c++
    unsigned in transformLoc = glGetUniformLocation(ourShader.programID, "transform");
    glGetUniformMatrix4fv(transformLoc, 1, GL_FALSE, glm::value_ptr(trans));
    ```
- The first argument is the uniform's location.
- The 2nd tells OpenGL how many matrices we'd like to send, which is 1.
- The third asks if we want to transpose our matrix, that is to swap the columns and the rows.
- OpenGL developers often use an internal matrix layout called **column-major ordering** which is the default matrix layout in GLM so there is no need to transpose the matrices.
- The last is the actual matrix data.
- ***Enjoy the render***
- To rotate the cube over time:
    ```c++
    glm::mat4 trans;
    trans = glm::translate(trans, glm::vec3(0.5f, -0.5f, 0.0f));
    trans = glm:: rotate(trans, (float)glfwGetTime(), glm::vec3(0.0f, 0.0f, 1.0f));
    ```
- Here, we first rotate the container around the origin (0, 0, 0) and once it's rotated, we translate its rotated version to the bottom-right corner of the screen.
- Remember that the actual transformation order should be read in reverse.

## Exercises
- Using the last transformation on the container, try switching the order around by first rotating and then translating. See what happens and try to reason why this happens.
- Try drawing a second container with another call to glDrawElements but place it at a different position using transformations only. Make sure this second container is placed at the top-left of the window and instead of rotating, scale it over time (using the sin function is useful here; note that using sin will cause the object to invert as soon as a negative scale is applied).

